1 
 Main Feature s of the Constitution of Nepal, 2015  
1) Internaliz ation of the people's sovereign right and right to autonomy and self -rule, while 
maintaining freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity, national unity, independence and 
dignity of Nepal . 
2) Commitment to  competitive multi -party democratic governance system, civil liber ties, 
fundamental rights, human rights, adult franchise, periodic el ections, complete press 
freedom,  independent, im partial and competent judiciary  and the concept of rule of la w 
and build a prosperous nation . 
3) Resolution to  a just society with protection and promotion of social and cultural solidarity, 
co-existence, harmony, and unity in diversity , while  ending all forms of discrimination 
and oppression ,and recalling  sacrifice made  from time to time  by people for national 
interest, democracy, progressive change  the glorious history.  
4) Constitution as  the fundamental law of Nepal , and every person bound to observe it. 
5) Nepal as an i ndependent, indivisible, sovereign, secu lar, inclusive, democratic, socialism -
oriented, federal democratic republican state . 
6) Safeguarding of the  independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality, freedom, 
dignity of Nepal and of the rights of the Nepalese people, border security, economic 
wellbeing and prosperity as the fundamental tenets  of national interest ; andany conduct 
and act co ntrary to national interest being punishable.  
7) Nepali  language in the Devnagari script asthe official language of Nepal and all languages 
spoken as the mother tongues in Nepal being the languages of the nation.  
8) The Government of Nepal  (GoN) ,within  one year of the commencement of the 
Constitution, is to constitut e a Language Commission with a c hairperson  and members 
comprising representation of the States.  
9) The Language Commission  is to recommend GoN  on determination of the criteria to be 
fulfilled fo r the recognition of the official language, measures to be adopted for the 
protection, promotion and development of languages, the levels of development of mother 
tongues on the potentiality of their use in education.  
10) No citizen of Nepal is to be deprived of the right to obtain citizenship . 
11) Provision of s ingle federal citizenship with State identity.  2 
 12) Right of person  acquiring citizenship by descent to obtain the citizenship certificate with 
gender identity by the name of his or her mother or father.  
13) Provision of t he non -residential citizenship of Nepal for a person , who has acquired the 
citizenship of a foreign country, has resided in a country other than a SAARC member 
state, and who or whose father or mother, grandfather or grandmother was previousl y a 
Nepalese citizen by decent or birth but subsequently acquired a foreign  citizenship , thereby 
entitling such person to economic, social and cultural rights in accordance with the 
Federal law.  
14) Various civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights  guaranteed as fundamental 
rights : rights to lif e with dignity, freedom, equality, communication, justice,  property, 
freedom  ofreligion, information, privacy,  language and culture,  employment ,  labor ,  
clean environment , education , health care, food,  housing ,social justice, social security  
and constitutional remedy , rights against exploitation, torture,  preventive detention, 
untouchability and discrimination and exile , and rights of women, children,  Dalits, senior 
citizens, consumers and victim of crim e. 
15) The State being  bound to provide  for legislative measures as required within three years of 
the commencement of th e Constitution for implement ation of  these rights.  
16) Provision of a ffirmative action  for the protection, empowerment or development of the 
citizens including the socially or culturally backward women, Dalit, indigenous, 
indigenous nationalities, Madhesi, Tharu, Muslim, oppressed class, Pichhada class, 
minorities, the marginalized, farme rs, labours, youths, children, senior citizens, gender and 
sexual minorities, persons with disabilities, pregnant persons, incapacitated or helpless, 
backward region and economically indigent Khas Arya . 
17) Duties  of citizens  to safeguard the nationality, sovereignty and integrity of Nepal being 
loyal to the nation, abide by the Constitution and law, render compulsory service as and  
when the State so requires , and protect and promote public and national property.  
18) The State 's political objective is to enhanc e freedom , sovereignty, territorial integrity and 
independence of Nepal by mutual cooperative federalism and incorporating the principle 
of proportional participation in the system of governance on the basis of local autonomy 
and decentralization.  3 
 19) The Stat e's social and cultural objective is to consolidate the national unity by maintaining 
social cohesion, solidarity and harmony, while recognizing cultural diversity and its 
economic objective is to develop a socialism -oriented indepe ndent and prosperous 
economy . 
20) Stipulation of p olicies regarding national unity and national security, political and 
governance system of State, social, and cultural transformation, economy, industry and 
commerce, agriculture and land reforms,  development, protection, promotion  and use of 
natural resources, basic needs of the citizens, labour and employment, social justice and 
inclusion, justice and penal system, tourism and international relations.  
21) The State being obliged to make a prosperous and affluent country by  protecting  and 
promoting fundamental rights and human rights, pursuing directive principles of the State 
and gradually implementing policies of the State keeping intact the freedom, sovereignty, 
territorial integrity and independence of Nepal.  
22) GoN is to submit to the President an annual report containing the steps taken and 
achievements made in the implementation of the directives principles, policies and 
obligations of the state. 
23) Main structure of Nepal being of three levels namely, Federation, State and Local.  
24) Formation of Seven States  in the State level  and t heir name s and capital sto be determined 
by two - third majority of the concerned State A ssembly.  
25) The legislative power of the Local level to be vested in the Village Assembly and 
Municipal Assembly.  
26) Exclusive and concurrent p owers of the Federation , State  and L ocal levels being 
enumerated in the  Schedules, with the residual power being vested in the  Federation.  
27) President, the head of Nepal , is to  be elected by an electoral college, consisting of 
members of the F ederal P arliament and the State Assemblies . 
28) The President and the Vice -President to be of different sex or community.  
29) A person already elected twice as the President being disqualified to become a candidate 
for the President.  
30) A multi -party, competitive, federal democratic republican parliame ntary system based on 
plurality be ing the form of government . 4 
 31) The executive power of Nepal being vested in  the Council of Ministers in accordance with 
the Constitution and law.  
32) The President  isto appoint the parliamentary party leader of the political party with the 
majority in t he House of Representatives as the Prime Minister, and a Council of Ministers 
to be formed in his/her chairperson ship.  
33) The Federal Council of Ministers not to exceed 25 Ministers  including the Prime Minister.  
34) A person defeated in the election to the then House of Representatives not  to be qualified 
to be appointed as Minister during the term of such House of Representatives.  
35) No-confidence motion not  to be moved until first two years of appointment of the Prime 
Minister  and the member proposed for Prime Minister  is also to be mentioned in such 
motion . 
36) Federal Legislature consisting of two Houses to be known as the House of Representatives 
and the National Assembly , called as the Federal Parliament.  
37) The House of Representatives consisting of 275 members:  165 members elected through 
the first -past-the-post electoral system , and 110 members through  proportional 
representation electoral system.  
38) In nominating candidates by political parties for  election to the House of Representatives 
under the proportional electoral system, representation is to be ensured  on the basis of a 
closed list also from women, Dalit , indigenous peoples, Khas Arya , Madhesi , Tharu , 
Muslims and back ward regions, on the basis of population, also making geographical and 
territorial balance.  
39) At least one third of the total number of members elected from each political party 
represen ting in the Federal Parliament are to b e women.  
40) The National Assembly , as a p ermanent House ,consisting  of 59  members witheight  
members, including at least three women , elected from each State with 56 in total ,and three 
members, including at least one woman, are to be nominated  by the President  on 
recommendation of GoN . 
41) Election  is to be so held that there is one woman out of the Speaker and the Deputy 
Speaker of the House of Representatives and  one woman out of the Chairperson and the 
Vice -Chairperson of the National Assembly . 
42) Provision of an i ndependent, competent and  unitary nature of judiciary in Nepal.  5 
 43) Three tiers of courts : The Supreme Court; o ne H igh Court in each State  and one District 
Court in each district .  
44) The Supreme Court is to consist of a  maximum of 20 Judges in a ddition to the Chief 
Justice.  
45) Provision of  one Constitutional Bench, in the Supreme Court, consisting of five judges  of 
the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice.  
46) Each High Court to consist of such number of Judges, in addition to the Chief Judge, as 
provided by the Federal law.  
47) Provision for formation of o ther specialized courts, judicial bodies or tribunals to try and 
settle specific types and nature of cases.  
48) Any criminal offence involving imprisonment for a term of more than one year not to be 
under the jurisdiction of a body other than a court, specialized court, military court or 
judicial body.  
49) Provision of form of government in the States s imilar to that in the Federation.  
50) Provision of a Chief of State in each State, as a representative ofGoN being appointed by 
the President.  
51) A leader  of the parliamentary party commanding a majority in the State Assembly to be 
appointed by the Chief of  State asthe Chief Minister, and the State Council of Ministers to 
be  constituted under his or her chairpersonship.  
52) The State  Council of Ministersnot to exceed 20 percent of the total number of members of 
the State Assembly, including the Chief Minister.  
53) No-confidence motion not to be presented until two years of app ointment of the Chief 
Minister , and t he name of the member proposed for Chief Minister is to be mentioned in 
the no -confidence motion.  
54) Provision of u nicameral legislature in a State called as the State Assembly.  
55) Each State Assembly consists of members in a number that is twice as many as the 
number of members elected to the House of Representatives from the concerned State, 
through the first past the post electoral system, considered as to be 60 percent, and the re st 
40 percent members to be elected  through the proportional electoral system.  
56) The executive power of the Local l evel being vested in the Village and Municipal 
Executive.  6 
 57) Each Village Executive  is toconsist of a Chairperson, Vice - chairperson, Ward 
Chairpe rson, four women members and two members from the Dalit or minority 
communities elected by Village Assembly . 
58) Each Municipal Executive  is to consist  of a Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairpersons, 
five women members and three members from the Dalit or minority communities elected 
by Municipal Assembly.  
59) The District Assembly being responsible for  coordination between the Village Bodies and 
Municipalities withi n the district.  
60) TheDistrict Assembly consisting of  Chairpersons  and Vice -Chairpersons of  the Village 
Executives, and Mayors and Deputy Mayors of  the Municipal Executives within the 
district.  
61) The District Assembly is to elect the District Coordination Committee consisting of a 
maximum of nine Members including one Chief, one Deputy Chief, at least three women 
and at least one Dalit or minority.  
62) Each Village Body is to consist of one Village Assembly consisting of the Chairperson 
and Vice -Chairperson of the Village Executive, Ward Chairpersons and four persons 
elected from each Ward. 
63) Provision for r epresentation of at  least two women from each ward in the Village 
Assembly.  
64) Each Municipal Assembly is to consist of the Mayor and Deputy Mayor of the Municipal  
Executive, Ward Chairpersons and four persons elected from each W ard. 
65) Provision for r epresentation  of at  least two women from each ward in the Municipal 
Assembly.  
66) The Federal l aw is to be applicable to the whole of, o r, if required, to any part of Nepal 
and a State law applicable to the whole of, or as required, to any part of the territory of the 
State.  
67) The relation between the Federation, State and Local l evel is to be  based upon principles 
of cooperation, coexistence and coordination.  
68) A State is to render assistance in the execution of legal provisions or judicial and 
administrative decisions or orders of another State.  7 
 69) Provision of a  State to exchange information and consult with another State on matters of 
common concern and interest, coordinate  each other on their activities and legislations and 
extend mutual assistance.  
70) A State is to provide , in accordance with its State law,  equal security, treatment and facility 
to residents of another State.  
71) The Federal Parliament is to make  necessary laws in order to maintain coordination 
between t he Federation, State and Local l evel.  
72) Prohibition on obstruction to the carriage of goods or extension of services in State or 
Local levels or by a State or Local level to another State or Local le vel or  on leving of  
tax, fee or charge thereon or on making  any kind of discrimination on the carriage or 
extension of such services or goods.  
73) An Inter -State Council  is to be formed  to settle disputes of political nature between the 
Federation and State a nd among the States, consisting of the Prime Minister as its 
Chairperson and Home Minister, Finance Minister and Chief Ministers of the respective 
States as its members.  
74) Provision of Various Constitutional Commissions:  National Natural Resources and Fiscal 
Commission, National Women Commission, National Dalit Commission, National 
Inclusion Commission, Indigenous Nationalities Commission, Madhesi Commission, 
Tharu Commission and Muslim Commission , in additio n to already existing  
Commission s: Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority, Auditor General , 
Public Service Commission, Election Commission and  National Human Rights 
Commission.  
75) No amendment is to be made to the Constitution in manner to be prejudicial to the 
sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence of Nepal and sovereignty vested in the 
people.  
76) In the case of a Bill on Amendment of Constitution being related with  alteration in the 
borders or power of anyState, the Speaker or the Chair person of the concerned House is to 
send that Bill to the State Assembly for its consent, within thirty days after its introduction 
in the Federal Parliament and such Bill only tobe submitted in the Federal Parliament if 
approved by majority in the State Assembly.  8 
 77) A Bill to amend or repeal any Article of this Constitution introduced in either House of the 
Federal Parliament is to be published for information to the general public within thirty  
days of its introduction in that  House.  
78) A person having the cit izenship of Nepal by descent only qualified to be elected , 
nominated or  appointed  as President, Vice -President, Prime Minister, Chief Justice, 
Speaker of the House of Representatives, Chief of State, Chief Minister, Speaker of a 
State Assembly and chief o f a security body.  
79) A citizen of Nepal having  a foreign permanent residence permit not be ing qualified for 
election, nomination or appointment to an office to be elected, nominated or appointed.  
80) Appointments to offices of Constitutional Organs and Bodies an d Nepalese ambassadors, 
and special emissaries are to be made  on the basis of the principle of inclusion.  
81) Power to make treaties or agreements  being vested in the Federation,  in making a treaty or 
agreement on a matter within  the list of State , GoN is to  consult the concerned State.  
82) Power of a State Council of Ministers , with the consent of GoN , to may make contractual 
agreements on financial and industrial matters.  
83) The capital of Nepal  to be situated in Kathmandu;  the capital of a State is to be  decided by  
two-thirds majority of the concerned State Assembly and until that decision, the business 
of a State  is to be conducted through the place as specified by the Government of Nepal.  
84) Ipso fact o conversion of t he Constituent Assembly existing at the time of co mmencement 
of the  Constitution into the Legislature -Parliament after its commencement, and the term 
of such Legislature -Parliament is to exist until 7 Magh 2074.  
85) Continuation of services of Judges working in t he courts and officials of the C onstitutional 
bodies, existing at the time of com mencement of the Constitution . 9 
  